---
title: Evolution of the Ego
category: personal development
layout: post
---

Been reading an interesting [article about leadership](http://ssrn.com/abstract=1585976) written by some Landmark people
and I thought some parts of it were interesting enough to excerpt.  Here's a section about what is
often called the "Ego".

> Evolution has made perceived threats to survival include not
only threats to our physical body and the opportunity for sex, but for human beings
also include threats to our identity.  These threats to identity include evidence to the
contrary or challenges to what we believe to be true about ourselves, others, and the
world, that is, what we “know” to be right.  The threat is often simply something said
by someone that is contrary to what we believe.

> Threats to our identity also include
the possibility of something we are  consciously or unconsciously  avoiding about
ourselves or our lives even being touched on, or the possibility of something we are
consciously or unconsciously hiding about ourselves or our lives being exposed

> Rather than being physically painful, such threats are emotionally or
psychically painful.  Although these threats are in no way a threat to one’s physical
being, the human brain reacts as though they are a physical threat, that is, reacts with
fight (including defensiveness) or flight (avoidance).

> Such threats cause the activity in the amygdala to hijack the brain, suppressing
the rational functioning carried on in the brain’s prefrontal cortex.  When our brain
interprets something as a threat, the amygdala-triggered response is limited to only
fight or flight.  (Flight includes freeze as a form of flight.)  Saying the same thing in
another way, when we are gripped by an amygdala hijack, our opportunity set for
being and action is reduced to some expression of fight or flight.

> For human beings, threats to a person’s identity that generate an amygdala
hijack that suppresses rational functioning include threats to anything with which that
person identifies.  For example, when a person identifies with an idea, belief or theory
(like a religious or political belief, or a scientific theory), a challenge to that idea,
belief or theory often triggers an amygdala hijack.  Other examples include such
things as something someone says that seems to make us wrong, or even something so
simple as having someone offer to correct an error we made, or a challenge to what
we “know” to be the right way of doing something, or a challenge to our worldview or
one or more of our frames of reference, or the threat of losing, or a threat to our
authority or position (dominance), or the threat of being dominated, or a challenge to
our way of being, or a threat of the loss of admiration (losing face). In short, threats to
a person’s identity, or to anything with which that person identifies, can and often do
generate an amygdala hijack that suppresses rational functioning.
